TITLE: Why America Will Lose Semiconductors
SOURCE: SemiAnalysis - Dylan Patel
DATE: 2022-06-13
URL: https://www.semianalysis.com/p/why-america-will-lose-semiconductors

The US has always been the world leader in semiconductors: design, manufacturing, and the tools to produce them. Semiconductors are the base of all technological innovation in computing and information technology. Without them, companies such as Amazon, Google, Microsoft, Meta, Apple, and Tesla would not exist. The US has slowly been losing its dominance over the semiconductor industry over the last couple of decades. In recent years, the rate of loss has been accelerating. If it is lost, then the foundational building block of modern technology is lost, and the US will cede its overarching technology advantage.

Before we get into the problem, let's talk about the current state of the US's semiconductor dominance. Most of the largest semiconductor equipment, design, and software companies are based in the US or have critical engineering in the US. In the equipment space, Lam Research, Applied Materials, and KLA are based in the US. ASML, the widely known leader in lithography, does much of their critical engineering for the EUV Source and EUV Collector out of San Diego. These technology assets and teams come from the acquisition of San Diego based Cymer. ASML pays royalties to the EUV-LLC whose membership includes multiple US national labs. Without these tools, it is impossible to manufacture chips.

The critical software needed to design chips is called EDA and it all comes from the US. Cadence, Synopsys, and Mentor Graphics (now owned by Siemens) are located in the US. Without this software, it is impossible to design modern chips.

American companies like Texas Instruments and Intel hold leading market shares in their respective fields while manufacturing their own chips. The 4 largest companies that design chips for external sale and use contract manufacturers are also American: Qualcomm, Broadcom, Nvidia, and AMD.

But that dominance is shifting away to countries that pose as geopolitical risks. US share of chip manufacturing is at an all-time low. The US will lose the semiconductor industry unless immediate action is taken. This is a national security crisis.

The US has been the hallmark of innovation through entrepreneurship, education, and making large investments. All three of these tenets are eroding, partially due to the private market's attitude and partially because the government's policies incentivize certain behaviors. The shift is occurring in favor of countries that have favorable government policies, regulatory support, focus on STEM higher education, and a general cultural recognition of the importance of semiconductor manufacturing.

Entrepreneurialism in Semiconductors

Entrepreneurialism is what innovated semiconductors in the first place. Ever since the invention of the transistor at Bell Labs, startups in Silicon Valley created and defined the modern semiconductor industry. Unfortunately, entrepreneurism in the semiconductor industry is falling away.

SemiEngineering.com tracks monthly semiconductor startup fundraising by company headquarters location. The trend is terrifying for prospects of American hardware dominance. Not only is most of the assembly done in China, but the most well-funded startups in the semiconductor field and the most IPOs in the semiconductor field are occurring there.

Why are there so few semiconductor startups in the US? The US private market of venture capital and angel investing is completely off its rockers investing in software platform based "tech" companies. While this type of investing is fine, these same venture capital and angel investors have completely ignored the semiconductor and hardware space. We here at SemiAnalysis have seen it firsthand as we have helped a few firms in the semiconductor industry raise money. It's extremely difficult to convince venture capitalists to invest in startups, even if they have promising technology and exceptional track records.

The private market has a strong prejudice against hardware startups. Semiconductors in general have higher startup costs, and the market potential is limited in comparison to a platform-based tech company. US based venture and angel investors require them to think in terms of tens or hundreds of billions of dollars addressable markets. They want software platforms that can have a few dozen employees with the potential to scale to billions in revenue. There can only be so many Instagrams, Ubers, Shopifys, and Airbnbs though.

Semiconductor investments are a tragedy of the commons style situation. No private entity will invest in basic infrastructure since no single entity will reap all possible rewards. Semiconductor manufacturing and design capacity are modern day infrastructure for technology and software, with the similar requirement that these kind of infrastructure projects require government incentives and regulatory support to thrive.

Investment Crisis in Semiconductors

This problem exists at the largest firms as well. US share of semiconductor R&D has dropped drastically and domestic chip production has fallen from 40% to below 15%. Investment is not encouraged by our financial markets or our government policies.

China by far is building the most fabs, driven by their favorable tax and regulatory policies as well as massive subsidies. The US is a tiny share of worldwide spending. If the current rate of spending holds, then in a decade the US will be fabricating less than 10% of the world's semiconductors and China will be fabricating nearly 30% of them.

The US national, state, and local governments have created tax and regulatory policy that makes investing in new manufacturing capacity for semiconductors incredibly difficult. It takes mountains of money and many years to even get through the process of permitting and approval to begin a project in the US. This contrasts with other nations who offer tax credits and outsized deductions for investments in semiconductor tools, streamlined processes for permitting and approval, and entire developments of new apartments, homes, and businesses to quickly crop up around semiconductor facilities.

One solution is offering a permanent option for a 100% deduction of chip manufacturing equipment, tools, and other associated capital expenditures in the first year of purchase. China has gone as far as offering tax holidays for up to 10 years to domestic semiconductor companies.

This policy gap caused Micron, the largest US based memory manufacturer, to offshore manufacturing out of the US. Micron now produces the majority of their memory chips in Singapore and Taiwan, despite their R&D hub and original manufacturing facilities being located in the United States. The two largest memory manufacturers in the world, SK Hynix and Samsung, are headquartered in South Korea and hold larger market share despite being generally considered equal or behind Micron in technology — partially the byproduct of various South Korean semiconductor policies which incentivize larger investments in fabrication capacity.

Broadcom is an example of the broken US tax policy incentivizing the wrong behavior. Although Broadcom has been a stellar stock, their innovation strategy has been very negative for the industry as a whole. Broadcom generally keeps a very tight lid on all expenses, including R&D growth, while increasing prices for chips and software where they enjoy near-monopoly status. They use these profits to acquire more innovative leading companies. The policy is colloquially known as the "Hock Tan Flywheel."

Intel is another example of poor investment-related policy. Instead of innovating in new areas, they focused on lowering capital expenditures and total spending as a percentage of revenue, using profits to buy back shares and pay larger dividends. Shareholder-elected board members cheered this on. There is certainly a lot more to Intel's downfall including technological missteps and a toxic corporate culture, but the flaws in US tax policy and financial markets were certainly a big contributor.

Education in Semiconductors

Even if the startups and production facilities were in the US, there is a severe shortage of skilled workers. By 2025, this shortage is projected to be as high as 300,000 workers. Most Americans who pursue higher education do so in a non-STEM field. Over 5 million people were granted degrees at postsecondary institutions in the US, yet not even 1/5th were in STEM. Two-thirds of STEM PhD students in the US are foreigners. China has nearly 5 million people graduating with STEM degrees annually.

The US must make it easier for educated people around the world to immigrate. China doesn't just allow semiconductor workers to immigrate — they explicitly find people they want and go after them. There are multiple state-owned enterprises which offer a highly specific and prestigious quality of life to engineers moving from Taiwan, including spacious accommodation near semiconductor hubs and personal tax advantages.

Actions Congress Must Take

Congress must immediately pass the CHIPS Act with guardrail provisions that restrict recipients from expanding in China. The $52B is still a drop in the bucket compared to the over $250B of subsidies SemiAnalysis has tallied from the Chinese government in the form of tax policy, direct and indirect grants, local joint ventures, and subsidized loans.

Congress must fix the US tax code to bring it on par with other nations by implementing an optional 100% bonus depreciation for chip manufacturing equipment, tools, and capital expenditures in the year of purchase, plus a permanent tax credit for these investments.

Congress must fix the US permitting and regulatory lock which severely lengthens the amount of time and increases costs for creating semiconductor manufacturing facilities.

Congress must fix the R&D spending gap by adding a tax credit for R&D related to semiconductors, fix the startup crisis by directing the National Science Foundation to create semiconductor startup incubators and accelerators, fund semiconductor research facilities similar to Europe's IMEC, fix the skilled semiconductor worker shortage by allowing skilled semiconductor workers to immigrate, and pass right-to-repair laws to increase interest in the hardware industry.

If these actions are taken, the ingenuity and innovation of America can be unleashed, and the US can stay at the apex of the semiconductor industry. If these actions are not taken, the US will further erode its leadership in an industry with ever increasing importance to national security.
